---
title: Abstract
order: 1
container: header
---
**This manuscript is in progress. Believe nothing it says right now.**

We have shown previously that individual sites in many proteins in various viruses generally evolve based on two protein structural constraints; those two constraints are the relative solvent accessibility (RSA) of a site and the proximity of a site to some critical surface. However, it is not known whether or not these constraints act uniformly for all of the proteins in a single virus, and it remains unclear if these constraints are critical for rapidly mutating viruses. Therefore, have carried out an analysis of structural predictors of $$ dN/dS $$ in HIV-1. Our results indicate that structural constraints do not act uniformly in a single virus and each (RSA and proximity) show mixed results for HIV. Of the two broad categories of HIV proteins we surveyed, neither showed a common pattern of either adaptive evolution or modeling accuracy. Structural constraints were highly predictive in just one of three enzymes and one of three structural proteins. Those two proteins, the protease enzyme and the gp120 structural protein, explained between 30% and 40% of $$ dN/dS $$. In addition, we found that glycosylations in the gp120 protein could not predict evolution independently from either RSA or distance from the apical surface. Finally, we showed with a very conservative cross-validation scheme that adding distance from an optimized reference point significantly improves evolutionary predictions in the majority of HIV proteins. 