---
title: "Discussion"
order: 5
---

We have surveyed structural predictors of $$ dN/dS $$ in HIV-1. We found that the common structural predictors used in other viruses show mixed results for HIV. We found that neither the structural proteins nor the enzymes show a common pattern of either adaptive evolution or modeling accuracy. Evolution could only be modeled in one of the structural proteins (gp120) and one of the enzymes (protease). However, the models generated for those two proteins could explain between 30% and 40% of $$ dN/dS $$. We found that glycosylations in the gp120 protein could not predict evolution better than simply RSA or distance from the apical surface. Finally, we showed with a very conservative cross-validation scheme that adding distance from an optimized reference point significantly improves evolutionary predictions in the majority of HIV proteins. 

It was unexpected that the integrase protein had no structural predictor of evolution; this fact remained true no matter which domains we included and no matter how complete we made the structural model. Moreover, this is the first protein, not to mention the first viral protein, that has been found to have no structural predictors for its evolution. There are a number of possible explanations. First, considering the historical difficult of crystallizing the HIV-1 integrase, it may be that the protein spends most of its time in a relatively disordered state. Such a situation would necessarily reduce the pressure to be folded and reduce the RSA constraint. Second, since there are no full length structures from a single experiment, it is possible that the all of the partial structures that are available miss a significant portion of the correct protein contacts. Third, it is also possible that the crystal structures are simply not capturing any real physiological state. Fourth, some combination of these issues might be at play. For example, if the protein is frequently disordered, it may be relatively easy for the protein to be contorted into non-physiological states during crystallization.

Despite, the failure of structure predictors for integrase, HIV-1 proteins generally evolve according to known structural constraints. In particular, combined models of the rate of adaptation in gp120 and protease we quite successful. However, the extent to which each of the structural constraints predicted evolution in gp120 and protease varied widely. The two predictors, RSA and distance, accounted for approximately the same proportion of $$ dN/dS $$ in gp120 whereas RSA was largely useless as a predictor for protease. Therefore, it appears the only critical evolutionary constraint for the protease protein is the relative biophysical coupling of a site to the enzymatic site.

Of the six proteins we tested, gp120 was the most easily predicted by both RSA and the combined model. This finding is not particularly surprising since viral binding proteins are reliably under significant pressure from the host immune system and perform among the most critical functions for viral survival. We found a similarly predictive model of evolution for influenza hemagglutinin which performs largely the same function as gp120. Moreover, the directionality of the adaptive pressure was oriented in exactly the same direction in gp120 as in influenza hemagglutinin; the apical surface of both proteins is under intense adaptive pressure. Surprisingly, RSA and distance predicted a significantly larger portion of the evolution in gp120 than in influenza hemagglutinin. In addition, the small amount of $$ dN/dS $$ that could be accounted for by the category of glycosylation sites, was completely obliterated by controlling for either RSA or distance, or both. Therefore, contrary to some models, glycosylation status appears to not be a significant driver of sitewise adaptation in HIV. 